Add guidance on functions and tasks (#29)
lowRISC/style-guides: VerilogCodingStyle.md

end
```

### Functions and Tasks

> The following section applies to synthesizable RTL only.

Author: Once the DV style guide stuff is merged this should refer to the guidance for functions on DV. I'll await that PR to go in before this is merged and add a reference.

Reviewer: this has landed now if you want to add a reference.

***In synthesizable RTL use of functions is allowed, provided they are declared
automatic. Tasks should not be used.***

> Functions must be declared outside of a class in either a package or inside a

Author: I am now wondering if you can declare a function outside of a module/package? i.e

```systemverilog

function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a);
...
endfunction

module bar();
...
endmodule
```

I think you can but if not this paragraph is redundant.

Reviewer 2: I think it is understood that 'class' is a non-synthesizable construct, so we can omit it here. 

Functions declared in an SV file outside of a module or a package (yes, you can) is visible to the whole compilation unit AFTER that file is compiled. This is potentially adds unnecessary debug overhead. I think it should be limited to within the module / pkg / interface so that the scope is clear.

Reviewer: Just a quick note on this (will come back with
further review afterwards), it is legal to put a function
"floating" outside a module and class. Probably good
to leave this guidance here.

Reviewer: recommend resolving this conversation and leaving as is.

> module. A package is appropriate where the function relates to other definitions

Reviewer 2: Wrap `package` & `module` in back-ticks since they are SV keywords?

Reviewer: +1

Author: I decided against this as there's plenty of other places within the style guide that refer to module and package without the back-ticks. I think it partially comes down to keyword as noun vs keyword as keyword:

> Foos can only be declared within a package

vs

> There must only be one usage of `package` within a file

I will have a scan through this PR and identify any keyword as keyword usages and add back-ticks if they don't already exist.

in the package and could be useful to multiple modules (even if its currently
only used by one). A module is appropriate where the function specifically
relates to the internals of that module.

Functions should aim to conceptually represent a reusable block of combinational
logic.

> Storage types must be explicitly declared for all arguments and the function

Reviewer 2: Perhaps limit the args to only use 4-state data type `logic`?

Reviewer: +1

Author: I think it's useful to be able to pass enums and structs etc so I'll expand that to 4-state data type `logic` and datatypes derived from `logic`.

Also I think it's useful to have functions that work on integer parameters (a classic example is log2 though we have an in-built function for that) but to get this PR landed I'll forgot about that for now and add an issue.

return value.

> Do not use `input`, `output`, `inout`, or `ref` on function arguments.

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason to avoid these (except maybe `ref`)? The LRM doesn't indicate that these render the function unsynthesizable (AFAIK).

Reviewer 3: I feel like `ref` should be excluded, and `inout` may be a candidate we may want to exclude because of style reasons (avoid tristate constructs on-chip). But for more than just one return value, `output` could be useful...

Reviewer 3: Although I agree that functions should be kept simple and just return one value if possible...

Reviewer: This is a style guide after all, so I think it is a good idea to limit it to good practice,
which IMO is all inputs and just the one output. So if we're going with this particular
guidance, I would restate it as follows, since `input` per se isn't a problem.

  Do not use `output`, `inout`, or `ref` on function arguments. All functions should
  only consume inputs and produce the one function output. `input` is the default and
  is not required on the function arguments.

Then probably add this to your {.bad} examples

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(input [2:0] a, input [2:0] b, output [2:0] c);
  c = a - b;
  return a + b;
endfunction
```

Reviewer: recommend this modification.

> Do not assign to function arguments in the function body.

Reviewer 3: This will be a function of whether we allow `output` above...

Reviewer: agree: redundant with above guidance, can be removed.

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
 return a ^ b;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic [2:0] foo(input [2:0] a, [2:0] b);
  b = b + 1;
  return a + b;
endfunction
```

> It is recommended that data is returned from a function using an explicit

Author: (Copying comment as I updated the file and it doesn't appear on the new version)

I had initially said return style only but noticed that the aes block used function_name = result in some cases.

My main reason for disliking that style is it can somewhat obscure the control flow that leads you to the result, especially if you have code paths that give you two or more function_name = result statements.

Reviewer 4: I see no good reason for the `function_name = result` style, so I'd completely disallow it and change the AES block.

Author: @vogelpi (or anyone else) do you wish to offer any defense for this style or are you happy for it to be disallowed?

Reviewer 5: I wouldn't mind at all to change those functions in the AES module! I think having an explicit return value is cleaner and much more readable.

Author: Cool in that case I will switch it to allowing `return result` only.

> `return` style. Avoid using a `function_name = result` style other than for

Author: I had initially said `return` style only but noticed that the aes block used `function_name = result` in some cases.

My main reason for disliking that style is it can somewhat obscure the control flow that leads you to the result, especially if you have code paths that give you two or more `function_name = result` statements.

for simple single-expression / no control flow functions.

> &#x1f44d;

Reviewer: I think this should be moved last after a correct example of your {.bad} version, like

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
  if (a == 3'd2) begin
    foo = b;
  end else begin
    foo = a ^ b;
  end
endfunction
```

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
  logic [2:0] result;
  if (a == 3'd2) begin
    result = b;
  end else begin
    result = a ^ b;
  return result;
  end
endfunction

function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
 foo = a ^ b;
endfunction
```

Reviewer 6: Should the `result` be automatic?

Reviewer: recommend this movement, though i have an indentation error above (`end` should be
before `return result;`

```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
 foo = a ^ b;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic [2:0] foo(input [2:0] a, [2:0] b);
  if (a == 3'd2) begin
    foo = b;
  end else begin
    foo = a ^ b;
  end
endfunction
```

For any local variables ensure they will get assigned on all code-paths, whether
through an initial assignment or through the use of `else` and `default:` for
`if` and `case` statements

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);

>   logic [2:0] local_var_1 = 3'd0;

Author: Was wondering if this initial assignment along with definition is ok, couldn't immediately find anything in the LRM that suggests it would be problematic.

Reviewer 3: I think it _should_ be ok, lint is fine with it as well. In the past I always assigned defaults explicitly on a new line, though, to be on the safe side... maybe someone else has more experience with this variant?

Reviewer 4: It's different only for static functions (without `automatic`). 

To keep people from tripping over the differences, having the initialization in a separate line gives code that works the same in static and automatic functions. So I'd write:

```
logic [2:0] local_var_1;
local_var_1 = 3'd0;
```

Reviewer: agreeing with @imphil

  logic [2:0] local_var_2;

  if (a == 0) begin

>     local_var = 3'd2;

Reviewer 2: I'm guessing this should be local_var_1 (ditto on 2386)?

Reviewer: agreeing with @sriyerg

  end

>   case(b)

Reviewer 3: we strongly encourage to use `unique case` hence I would make this a unique case here as well...

Reviewer: agreeing with @msfschaffner

    3'd0:    local_var_2 = 3'd1;
    3'd1:    local_var_2 = 3'd3;
    default: local_var_2 = 3'd0;
  endcase

  return local_var_1 + local_var_2;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
  logic [2:0] local_var_1;
  logic [2:0] local_var_2;

  if (a == 0) begin
    local_var = 3'd2;
  end

>   case(b)

Reviewer 3: `unique case`

end
```

### Functions and Tasks

The following section applies to synthesizable RTL only. See the [Coding Style
Guide for Design Verification](DVCodingStyle.md) for DV usage.

> ***In synthesizable RTL use of functions is allowed, provided they are declared

Reviewer 4: use -> the use

`automatic`. Tasks should not be used.***

Functions must be declared in either a package or inside a module. A package is
appropriate where the function relates to other definitions in the package and

> could be useful to multiple modules (even if its currently only used by one). A

Reviewer 4: its -> it's/it is

module is appropriate where the function specifically relates to the internals
of that module.

Functions should aim to conceptually represent a reusable block of combinational

> logic.

Reviewer 4: Maybe highlight *combinatorial*

Author: Considered it, thought it ended up looking a bit odd so left it.

Storage types must be explicitly declared for all arguments and the function
return value. All types must be 4-state data types, either `logic` or types
derived from `logic` (such as appropriate `struct`, `enum` or `typedef` types).

> Do not use `output`, `inout`, or `ref` on function arguments. All function

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Do not use `output`, `inout`, or `ref` on function arguments. All functions
```

should only consume inputs and produce one output. `input` is the default and is
not required on the function arguments.

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}

> // - Doesn't have explicit storage type on 'a' or `b` or return type

Reviewer 4: Choose the same quoting style for a and b

// - `b` being used as `output` argument

> // - `input` not required on a

Reviewer 4: also quote a for consistency.

function automatic [2:0] foo(input [2:0] a, [2:0] b);
  b = b + 1;
  return a + b;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}

> // - Doesn't have explicit storage type on 'a', `b` or `c`

Reviewer 4: as above.

  return a + b;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
 return a ^ b;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
typedef logic [2:0] bar_t;

typedef struct packed {
  logic [2:0] field;
} baz_t;

function automatic logic [2:0] foo(bar_t a, baz_t b);
  return a + b.field;
endfunction
```

It is recommended that data is returned from a function using an explicit
`return result` style. Avoid using a `function_name = result` style other than
for simple single-expression / no control flow functions.

&#x1f44e;
```systemverilog {.bad}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
  if (a == 3'd2) begin
    foo = b;
  end else begin
    foo = a ^ b;
  end
endfunction
```

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
  logic [2:0] result;

  if (a == 3'd2) begin
    result = b;
  end else begin
    result = a ^ b;
  end

  return result;
endfunction
```

&#x1f44d;
```systemverilog {.good}
function automatic logic [2:0] foo(logic [2:0] a, logic [2:0] b);
 foo = a ^ b;
endfunction
```

> For any local variables ensure they will get assigned on all code-paths, whether

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All local variables must be assigned in all code paths, either
```

through an initial assignment or through the use of `else` and `default:` for

> `if` and `case` statements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`if` and `case` statements.
```
